NETWATCH CHAT SUMMARY
=====================
Session: 17
Date: 2026-03-15
Starting version: v3.3.36 (context doc authoritative; zip label matched)
Ending version: v3.3.37 (NetWatch package); Promtail installed as infrastructure (no version bump)
Summary: Structlog rework shipped as v3.3.37, JSON mode verified, Promtail installed
  on the NetWatch Pi and confirmed shipping journal logs to Loki on ops-pi.

SCOPE NOTE: This session covered two distinct arcs (structlog rework and Promtail
install) plus design discussion. Expanded summaries produced for both major items.


WHAT WAS ACCOMPLISHED
---------------------
- Design discussion: structlog rework design brief produced. Three approaches evaluated
  (minimal adoption, full adoption, hand-rolled JSON formatter). Option B (full
  structlog adoption) selected. Flat service names chosen over dotted Python logger
  names (monitor, web, main) after a follow-up question surfaced a flip in the initial
  recommendation. Full reasoning documented in the brief.

- v3.3.37 -- Structlog rework (see Feature_StructlogRework.txt):
  structlog 25.5.0 installed in venv as netwatch-svc. wsgi.py and main.py rewritten
  with structlog configuration (_configure_structlog() function). monitor.py and
  webapp.py updated to use structlog.get_logger().bind(service="..."). All log calls
  converted from f-string format to keyword argument format. LOG_FORMAT config key
  added to config_schema.py (pretty/json, Logging section). JSON mode verified in
  journalctl showing structured fields (service, event, level, timestamp, and
  domain-specific fields like lan, wan, latency_ms etc.).

- Promtail install (see Feature_PromtailInstall.txt):
  Promtail 3.5.1 linux-arm64 binary installed at /usr/local/bin/promtail. Config at
  /etc/promtail/config.yaml reading from systemd journal, shipping to Loki on
  ops-pi (192.168.100.230:3100). Systemd service running as dedicated promtail user
  with systemd-journal group membership. Confirmed working end-to-end: logs visible
  in Grafana Explore with {host="netwatch-pi"} query.


WHAT WAS ATTEMPTED BUT FAILED
------------------------------
- Promtail linux-arm binary (v3.5.1): Downloaded and extracted successfully but failed
  to execute with "required file not found". The binary is a 32-bit armhf ELF
  requesting /lib/ld-linux-armhf.so.3, which is not present on the 64-bit OS.
  The Pi 3B+ has a 64-bit Cortex-A53 processor running 64-bit Raspberry Pi OS --
  the arm64 binary is the correct choice. Replaced with promtail-linux-arm64.zip
  which ran natively with no issues.

- Alloy (Grafana's Promtail replacement): Investigated as the forward-looking choice
  since Promtail reached EOL in March 2026. Alloy only supports Linux AMD64 and ARM64
  officially -- confirmed. However the GitHub issue tracker revealed Grafana has been
  reluctant to add armhf support, which was the concern that led to the Alloy
  investigation in the first place. Once it was confirmed the Pi is 64-bit (ARM64),
  Alloy would actually be viable -- but we chose to stay with Promtail 3.5.1 to match
  the Loki version on ops-pi and keep things simple. Alloy migration is a future option
  if needed.

- Promtail permissions failure: When the service was first started, it failed with
  "open /var/lib/promtail/positions.yaml: permission denied". Root cause: the
  positions.yaml file was created during a manual test run as mboynton, then the
  service was configured to run as the promtail user. The file was owned by mboynton.
  Fixed with sudo chown -R promtail:promtail /var/lib/promtail.

- Initial max_age: 12h caused Loki 400 rejections: on the first test run, Promtail
  tried to ship 12 hours of backlog journal entries. Loki rejected entries older than
  its acceptance window with HTTP 400. Fixed by changing max_age to 1h in the config.


DECISIONS MADE
--------------
- Structlog full adoption (Option B) over minimal adoption: full adoption is the only
  approach that makes Loki queries actually useful. Minimal adoption would ship JSON
  with all data buried in the message string, defeating the purpose.

- Flat service names (monitor, web, main) over dotted Python logger names
  (netwatch.monitor etc.): the dotted hierarchy is a standard-logging concept that
  adds no value in structlog. Shorter names are cleaner in Grafana label filters.
  Initial recommendation in the design brief said to keep existing names -- this was
  reversed after the user asked a follow-up question that prompted real reasoning.

- journald as Promtail source (not file-based): user correctly pushed back on the
  initial suggestion to tail only netwatch.log. The Pi runs other things worth having
  in Loki (systemd events, SSH logins, apt activity, kernel messages). journald
  captures everything; file tailing only captures what we explicitly think to include.

- Promtail over Alloy: Promtail 3.5.1 chosen to match the Loki version on ops-pi
  and avoid complexity. Alloy migration deferred -- it is viable on this hardware
  (ARM64) but adds no value right now.

- max_age: 1h in Promtail config: conservative initial value to avoid Loki rejections
  on first run. Can be increased once the pipeline is stable and the Loki retention
  window is understood.

- End-of-session context doc update included in v3.3.37 package. Backlog updated
  to mark structlog rework complete and Promtail ready-to-install (now also complete).
  Ops-pi service reference and next-task documented in CurrentTask.txt.


OPEN QUESTIONS / UNRESOLVED ITEMS
----------------------------------
- [PENDING] Grafana dashboard for NetWatch logs: Promtail is shipping to Loki but no
  NetWatch-specific Grafana dashboard has been built yet. Next session should build
  a dashboard that surfaces health_check events, reset events, and error counts.

- [PENDING] Promtail max_age: currently set to 1h. Once the pipeline is confirmed
  stable over a few days, consider increasing to 12h or 24h so historical context
  is available in Loki after a Pi reboot or Promtail restart.

- [PENDING] Alloy migration: Promtail is EOL as of March 2026. Not urgent -- it will
  continue working -- but worth noting for future sessions. The Pi is ARM64 so Alloy
  is viable when the time comes.

- [PENDING] Weekly Pi update cron (v3.3.12): still not confirmed fired in the wild.
  Verify: crontab -l | grep netwatch-pkg-update

- [PENDING] Web service silent-exit after delayed restart: still unconfirmed potential
  bug. Continue watching journalctl on package installs.

- [PENDING] API versioning (/api/v1/) retrofit of NetWatch: decided Session 15,
  not yet implemented.

- [PENDING] 9 PENDING DISCUSSION items in Audit_Findings.txt remain open.


BACKLOG CHANGES
---------------
Completed this session:
- NetWatch structlog rework (v3.3.37) -- structlog library, LOG_FORMAT config key,
  JSON output in all four services
- Promtail on NetWatch Pi -- installed, configured, running as service, confirmed
  shipping to Loki on ops-pi

No new backlog items added.


EXPANDED SUMMARIES PRODUCED
----------------------------
- Feature_StructlogRework.txt -- Full detail on structlog adoption: design brief,
  file-by-file changes, log call conversions, LOG_FORMAT config key, JSON mode
  verification.
- Feature_PromtailInstall.txt -- Full detail on Promtail install: binary selection
  failures, final arm64 install, config, service setup, permissions fix, verification.


NEW GOTCHAS ADDED
-----------------
Appended directly to Gotchas.txt during this dev session per process:

- PI 3B+ IS 64-BIT (ARM64), NOT 32-BIT -- new entry. The Cortex-A53 is ARMv8/64-bit.
  Raspberry Pi OS Lite 64-bit runs a 64-bit kernel and userspace. Always use arm64
  binaries, not armhf/arm binaries.
- CREATE SERVICE USER BEFORE RUNNING MANUALLY -- new entry. If a service account is
  planned for a daemon, create it and set directory ownership before doing any manual
  test runs. Running manually as a different user creates files with wrong ownership
  that the service account cannot write, causing immediate startup failure.


CURRENT STATE
-------------
- Pi version: v3.3.37
- Promtail running as systemd service, confirmed shipping to Loki
- All NetWatch services running normally on JSON log format
- Next task: build a Grafana dashboard for NetWatch logs (health_check events,
  reset events, error rates from Loki)
